## Community Building {#sec:community}

Choosing a software package for a particular purpose involves evaluating several differentiating factors; these factors include the functionality of a package, the performance of a package, the user-friendliness, and even the ability of an individual to find help, engage with others and feel a sense of participation.
**cite something here** The development, fostering and design of the community around `yt` is deemed to be both crucial to the success or failure of `yt`, and in many ways inseparable from its functionality.

### Composition

There are several rough categories of individuals engaged in development and utilization of `yt`.
As a result of its API-first design, there are few if any individuals who use `yt` that do not do so through the scripting interface; this means that the vast (if not exclusive) majority of individuals who interact with the functionality in `yt` are doing so by writing their own scripts, modules, and code, and arguably engaging in a value-added development process of their own.
The majority of individuals using `yt` at present are in astronomy and astrophysics, typically fields of simulation, although there is an increasing group of individuals from other domains that are participating in development and using `yt` for their own domain-specific problems.

Making the distinction somewhat more clearly, there are individuals who have built their own scripts and utilized them as well as individuals who have contributed changes or modules to the primary `yt` codebase.
In addition, there is an emerging set of projects that build on `yt` as infrastructure to conduct scientific analysis.
These developers are largely driven by their own pragmatic scientific needs, and they constitute the majority of developers (by number) that contribute to the code base.
The majority of these individuals are early- to mid-career researchers, typically graduate students, postdocs, and assistant professors.

In recent years, there has emerged a more coherent contingency of individuals who participate in both pragmatically-focused development of modules and functionality for their own benefit as well as modules or overall improvement that is supplemental or even external to their own research agenda.
These improvements include improvements to the unit handling, to the plotting code, to infrastructure for loading disparate datasets, and so on.
At this time we do not know of any individuals funded to work on `yt` completely independent of a scientific or scholarly goal.

The composition of the community, particularly with a mixture of timelines for goal-setting and completion, can at times cause frustrations and difficulties.
For instance, the response to "Can this feature be implemented?" often includes an invitation for the questioner to collaborate on developing that feature and submitting it to the codebase.
Developing a schedule of releases is an act of consensus building, both deciding what bugs are critical to fix in the timeline of a release as well as building consensus on what features should be considered blockers for a new release.
The intersection of this with academic deadlines (for instance job application season) requires balance and care.

### Types of Tasks

When evaluating the level of engagement, we consider a few different classifications of tasks that are performed by individuals in the community, and evaluate these based on how they flow into greater engagement.

 * Filing issues
 * Participating in mailing list discussions
 * Issuing a pull request
 * Writing documentation
 * Participating in code review
 * Drafting an enhancement proposal
 * Closing bug reports

While there are other activities that individuals can participate in, these are the typical activities we see among participants in the community.
The order, flowing from the first to the last, is the typical flow we see for an individual coming to participate in the community.
The first step is typically to file an issue or bug report (occasionally these are requests for new features), followed by partipating in development-focused discussion on mailing lists.
The next level of engagement typically involves the development of a new piece of functionality, refinement of existing code, or issuing a fix for a bug or issue.
These take the form of pull requests (described in greater detail [here](#sec:development)) that can be reviewed and added to the code base.

The next level of engagement centers around tasks that are not fully-aligned with pragmatic, code-driven scientific inquiry.
The development of documentation is often viewed as orthogonal to the scientific process, and typically requires an iterative wrriting process.
Participation in code review, providing comments, feedback and suggestions to other authors, is another somewhat orthogonal task; it doesn't necessarily directly benefit the developer doing the reviewing (although it might) and it does not necessarily result in academic rewards (citations, authorship, etc).
But, it does arise from a pragmatic (ensuring code reliability) or altruistic (the public good of the software) motivation, and is thus a deeper level of engagement.

The final two activities, drafting enhancement proposals and closing bug reports, are the most engaged, and often the most removed from the academic motivation structure.
Developing an [enhancement proposal](#sec:ytep)  for `yt` means iterating with other developers on the motivation behind and implementation of a large piece of functionality; it requires both motivation to engage with the community and the patience to build consensus amongst stakeholders.
Closing bug reports -- and the development work associated with identifying, tracking and fixing bugs -- requires patience and often repeated engagement with stakeholders.

### Engagement Metrics

We include here plots of the level of engagement on mailing list discussions and the citation count of the original method paper.

### Governance

Between the publication of the first paper and this paper, the `yt` project instituted a form of governance involving a steering committee, a set of "members" of the project, and a defined process for developing improvements and enhancements (the YTEP, or `yt`-enhancement-proposal process).
YTEPs are discussed in [sec:ytep].
The systems developed account for a number of important procedures, mostly related to decision-making, but do not address pressing community needs such as community standards for conduct, changes in committee composition, sub-project coordination, or the transition of members and developers to "emeritus" status.
