## Indexing and Geometry

yt is designed for analysis and visualization of datasets that describe "natural" or "physical" phenomena; more generally, yt is designed to analyze data that can be characterized by a metric of some type.
The most common use case, by far, is that of data that is described in a Cartesian space, by the orthogonal axes of x, y and z.
However, for reasons related to naturalness of coordinate systems and relevance to physical phenomena, datasets are also frequently organized in other coordinate systems, such as cylindrical polar ($r$, $z$ and $\theta$), spherical ($r$, $\theta$ and $\phi$) and variants such as geographic (latitude, longitude and altitude).

Importantly, however, yt distinguishes between the *coordinate* space a dataset describes and the natural or *index* space by which its organization is described.
This distinction is the most relevant among datasets and data formats where the organization is *implicit*, rather than *explicit*; for instance, in a grid patch dataset, data variable locations are often only specified implicitly.
For a grid volume that covers a given region, the relationship between the "index" value of a cell (for instance, $i,j,k$) and its position in space (for instance, $x, y, z$ or $r, \theta, \phi$) requires transformation between a logically-Cartesian decomposition of the space and the potentially-non Cartesian space that it represents.

**This needs a diagram**

### Abstraction of Coordinate Systems

yt provides a system for defining relationships between index-space and coordinate-space.
During instantiation of a `Dataset` object, a helper object (`coordinates`, a subclass of `CoordinateHandler`) is created.
This helper object tracks the correspondance between numerical axes and spatial axes (for instance, even in some  Cartesian datasets, axis 0 corresponds to $z$ rather than $x$), the names of axes, and the transformation and pixelization methods for visualization.
In addition to these helper functions, the coordinate handler provides definitions for derived fields that describe local cell width (and orthogonal path length), positions in coordinate space as computed by index space coordinates, volumes, and surface areas.
These coordinate handlers also provide transformations between different spaces, albeit using the somewhat undesirable method of conversion to reference cartesian frames and subsequent conversion to local coordinate frames.

At present, coordinate spaces are defined in the following spaces:

| Coordinate system               | Axes                                                        |
|---------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------|
| Cartesian coordinates           | $x, y, z$                                                   |
| Cylindrical polar coordinates   | $r, z, \theta \in [0, 2 \pi] $                              |
| Spherical coordinates           | $r, \theta, \phi$                                           |
| Geographic coordinates          | latitude $\in [0, 180]$, longitude $\in [0, 360]$, altitude |
| Internal geographic coordinates | latitude, longitude, depth                                  |
| Spectral cube                   | Image $x$, Image $y$ and $\nu$                              |

Future developments may involve code generation for arbitrary coordinate systems, using SymPy or other libraries.
Independent of the visualization methods (which can often be reused), the development of coordinate systems is largely rote, applying straightforward mathematics to construct derived field definitions.
As such, using mechanisms in SymPy for construction of relationships between coordinate systems may be a feasible method of developing code-generation for coordinate system handlers in yt.
