## Data Objects {#sec:data_objects}

The basic principles by which `yt` operates are built on the notion of selecting data (through coarse and subsequent fine-grained indexing of data sources such as files), accessing that data in a memory-efficient fashion, and then processing that data into either a resultant set of quantitative data or a visualization.

Selections in `yt` are usually spatial in nature, although several non-spatial mechanisms focused on queries can be utilized as well.
These objects which conduct selection are selectors, and are designed to provide as small of an API as possible, to enable ease of development and deployment of new selectors.

Selectors require defining several functions, with the option of defining additional functions for optimization, that return true or false whether a given point is or is not included in the selected region.
These functions include selection of a rectilinear grid (or any point within that grid), selection of a point with zero extent and selection of a point with a non-zero spherical radius.

The base selector object utilizes these routines during a selection operation to maximize the amount of code reused between particle, patch, and octree selection of data.
These three types of data are selected through specific routines designed to minimize the number of times that the selection function must be called, as they can be quite expensive.

Selecting data from a grid is a two-step process.
The first step is identifying which grids intersect a given data selector; this is done through a sequence of bounding box intersection checks.
Within a given grid, the cells which are intersected are identified.
This results in the selection routine being called once for each grid object in the simulation and once for each cell located within an intersecting grid.
This can be conducted hierarchically, but due to implementation details around how the grid index is stored this is not yet cost effective.

Selecting data from an octree-organized dataset utilizes a recursive scheme that selects individual oct nodes, then for each cell within that oct, determining which cells must be selected or child nodes recursed into.
This system is designed to allow for having leaf nodes of varying cells-per-side, for instance 1, 2, 4, 8, etc.
However, the number of nodes is fixed at 8, with subdivision always occurring at the midplane.

The final mechanism by which data is selected is for discrete data points, typically particles in astrophysical simulations.
At present, this is done by first identifying which data files intersect with a given selector, then selecting individual points.
There is no hierarchical data selection conducted in this system, as we do not yet allow for re-ordering of data on disk or in-memory which would facilitate hierarchical selection through the use of operations such as Morton indices.

### Selection Routines

Given these set of hierarchical selection methods, all of which are designed to provide opportunities for early-termination, each *geometric* selector object is required to implement a small set of methods to expose its functionality to the hierarchical selection process.
Duplicative functions often result from attempts to avoid expensive calculations that take into account boundary conditions such as periodicity and reflectivity unless necessary.
Additionally, by providing some routines as options, we can in some instances specialize them for the specific geometric operation.

 * `select_cell(cell_center, cell_width)`: this function, which is somewhat degenerate with `select_bbox`, returns whether a given "cell," defined by its center and its width along each dimension, is included within the selection.  In situations where the cells are spaced logarithmically, rather than linearly, this may produce slightly reduced accuracy for near-misses and glancing-selections.
 * `select_point(position)`: this function returns whether or not a point of zero-extent is included within the selection.  This has some degeneracy with `select_sphere`.
 * `select_sphere(position, radius)`: This is equivalent to the `select_point` function, except that any point within the specified radius is included within the selector object.
 * `select_bbox(lower_left, upper_right)`: Determine overlap with an axis-aligned bounding box.  Particularly for hierarchical selection methods, determining whether or not a bounding box overlaps with a geometric selector can lead to early-termination of some selection operations.  
 * `select_bbox_edge(lower_left, upper_right)`: This is a special-case of the bounding box routine that provides information as to whether or not the *entire* bounding box is included or just a *partial* portion of the bounding box.

We demonstrate a handful of selection operations on a low-resolution dataset below.
In Figure @fig:reg2 we illustrate the selection of a rectangular prism (i.e., a `region`, like in Section @sec:dobj-region.
In Figure @fig:sp2, we illustrate the selection of a sphere (i.e., a `sphere`, like in Section @sec:dobj-sphere.
And, to demonstrate yt's ability to construct boolean selectors from these objects (i.e., Section @sec:dobj-bool we show what the logical `NOT` of these two objects would produce in @fig:reg2_not_sp2.

![
A selection of data in a low-resolution simulation from a rectangular prism.
](images/selectors/reg2.svg){#fig:reg2}

![
A selection of data in a low-resolution simulation from a sphere.
](images/selectors/sp2.svg){#fig:sp2}

![
The logical `A AND NOT B` for regions `A` and `B` from Figures @fig:reg2 and @fig:sp2 respectively.
](images/selectors/reg2_not_sp2.svg){#fig:reg2_not_sp2}


### Fast and Slow Paths

Given an ensemble of objects, the simplest way of testing for inclusion in a selector is to call the operation `select_cell` on each individual object.
Where the objects are organized in a regular fashion, for instance a "grid" that contains many "cells," we can apply both "first pass" and "second pass" fast-path operations.
The "first pass" checks whether or not the given ensemble of objects is included, and only iterates inward if there is partial or total inclusion.
The "second pass" fast pass is specialized to both the organization of the objects *and* the selector itself, and is used to determine whether either only a specific (and well-defined) subset of the objects is included or the entirety of them.

For instance, we can examine the specific case of selecting grid cells within a rectangular prism.
When we select a "grid" of cells within a rectangular prism, we can have either total inclusion, partial inclusion, or full exclusion.
In the case of full inclusion, where the entire grid is included within the selector, we simply sidestep the specific inclusion checks completely and return a full mask of cells to utilize.
In the case of partial inclusion, we can often determine the "start" and "end" indices of inclusion in the rectangular prism by examining the intersection volume.
This allows us to avoid many costly individual `select_cell` calls.

With discrete point selection (and for our purposes, often unstructured mesh falls into this category) we often do not have the same organizing principle on which we can rely.
However, utilizing hierarchical bitmap indexing we can often organize subsets of particles into collections of cells which may or may not be contiguous.
In this situation, we can check for full inclusion within data objects, although we are not able to identify start and stop indices as the data are not assumed to be organized spatially independent of how we have indexed them.

At present, the objects listed in @tbl:selection-objects are provided as selectors in yt.
We do make a distinction between "selection" operations and "reduction" or "construction" operations (such as projections and smoothing/resampling), but have included both here for consistency.
Additionally, some have been marked as not "user-facing," in the sense that they are not expected to be constructed directly by users, but instead are utilized internally for indexing purposes.
In columns to the right, we provide information as to whether there is an available "fast" path for grid objects.

| Object Name              | Object Type              |
| ------------------------ | ------------------------ |
| Arbitrary grid           | Resampling               |
| Boolean object           | Selection (Base Class)   |
| Covering grid            | Resampling               |
| Cut region               | Selection                |
| Cutting plane            | Selection                |
| Data collection          | Selection                |
| Disk                     | Selection                |
| Ellipsoid                | Selection                |
| Intersection             | Selection (Bool)         |
| Octree                   | Internal index           |
| Orthogonal ray           | Selection                |
| Particle projection      | Reduction                |
| Point                    | Selection                |
| Quadtree projection      | Reduction                |
| Ray                      | Selection                |
| Rectangular Prism        | Selection                |
| Slice                    | Selection                |
| Smoothed covering grid   | Resampling               |
| Sphere                   | Selection                |
| Streamline               | Selection                |
| Surface                  | Selection                |
| Union                    | Selection (Bool)         |

Table: Selection objects and their types. {#tbl:selection-objects}


