#### Arbitrary grid {#sec:dobj-arbitrary_grid}

*Arguments*: 

 * Left edge
 * Right edge
 * Active Dimensions

A 3D region with arbitrary bounds and dimensions.  In contrast to the
Covering Grid, this object accepts a left edge, a right edge, and
dimensions.  This allows it to be used for creating 3D particle
deposition fields that are independent of the underlying mesh, whether
that is yt-generated or from the simulation data.  For example,
arbitrary boxes around particles can be drawn and particle deposition
fields can be created.  This object will refuse to generate any fluid
fields.

#### Bool {#sec:dobj-bool}

*Arguments*: 

 * Operation
 * Data object 1
 * Data object 2

This is a boolean operation, accepting AND, OR, XOR, and NOT for
combining multiple data objects.  This object is not designed to be
created directly; it is designed to be created implicitly by using one
of the bitwise operations (&, \|, ^, \~) on one or two other data
objects.  These correspond to the appropriate boolean operations, and
the resultant object can be nested.

#### Covering grid {#sec:dobj-covering_grid}

*Arguments*: 

 * Level
 * Left edge
 * Active Dimensions

A 3D region with all data extracted to a single, specified resolution.
Left edge should align with a cell boundary, but defaults to the
closest cell boundary.

#### Cut region {#sec:dobj-cut_region}

*Arguments*: 

 * Base object
 * Conditionals

This is a data object designed to allow individuals to apply logical
operations to fields and filter as a result of those cuts.

#### Cutting {#sec:dobj-cutting}

*Arguments*: 

 * Normal
 * Center

This is a data object corresponding to an oblique slice through the
simulation domain.  This object is typically accessed through the
`cutting` object that hangs off of index objects.  A cutting plane is
an oblique plane through the data, defined by a normal vector and a
coordinate.  It attempts to guess an 'north' vector, which can be
overridden, and then it pixelizes the appropriate data onto the plane
without interpolation.

#### Data collection {#sec:dobj-data_collection}

*Arguments*: 

 * Object List

By selecting an arbitrary *object_list*, we can act on those grids.
Child cells are not returned.

#### Disk {#sec:dobj-disk}

*Arguments*: 

 * Center
 * Normal vector
 * Radius
 * Height

By providing a *center*, a *normal*, a *radius* and a *height* we can
define a cylinder of any proportion.  Only cells whose centers are
within the cylinder will be selected.

#### Ellipsoid {#sec:dobj-ellipsoid}

*Arguments*: 

 * Center
 *  a
 *  b
 *  c
 *  e0
 *  tilt

By providing a *center*,*A*,*B*,*C*,*e0*,*tilt* we can define a
ellipsoid of any proportion.  Only cells whose centers are within the
ellipsoid will be selected.

#### Intersection {#sec:dobj-intersection}

*Arguments*: 

 * Data objects

This is a more efficient method of selecting the intersection of
multiple data selection objects.  Creating one of these objects
returns the intersection of all of the sub-objects; it is designed to
be a faster method than chaining & ("and") operations to create a
single, large intersection.

#### Minimal sphere {#sec:dobj-minimal_sphere}

*Arguments*: 

 * Center
 * Radius

Build the smallest sphere that encompasses a set of points.

#### Octree {#sec:dobj-octree}

*Arguments*: 

 * Left edge
 * Right edge
 * Particle count refinement criteria

A 3D region with all the data filled into an octree.  This container
will mean deposit particle fields onto octs using a kernel and SPH
smoothing.

#### Ortho ray {#sec:dobj-ortho_ray}

*Arguments*: 

 * Axis
 * Coords

This is an orthogonal ray cast through the entire domain, at a
specific coordinate.  This object is typically accessed through the
`ortho_ray` object that hangs off of index objects.  The resulting
arrays have their dimensionality reduced to one, and an ordered list
of points at an (x,y) tuple along `axis` are available.

#### Particle proj {#sec:dobj-particle_proj}

*Arguments*: 

 * Axis
 * Field
 * Weight field

A projection operation optimized for SPH particle data.

#### Point {#sec:dobj-point}

*Arguments*: 

 * P

A 0-dimensional object defined by a single point

#### Quad proj {#sec:dobj-quad_proj}

*Arguments*: 

 * Axis
 * Field
 * Weight field

This is a data object corresponding to a line integral through the
simulation domain.  This object is typically accessed through the
`proj` object that hangs off of index objects.  YTQuadTreeProj is a
projection of a `field` along an `axis`.  The field can have an
associated `weight_field`, in which case the values are multiplied by
a weight before being summed, and then divided by the sum of that
weight; the two fundamental modes of operating are direct line
integral (no weighting) and average along a line of sight (weighting.)
What makes `proj` different from the standard projection mechanism is
that it utilizes a quadtree data structure, rather than the old
mechanism for projections.  It will not run in parallel, but serial
runs should be substantially faster.  Note also that lines of sight
are integrated at every projected finest-level cell.

#### Ray {#sec:dobj-ray}

*Arguments*: 

 * Start point
 * End point

This is an arbitrarily-aligned ray cast through the entire domain, at
a specific coordinate.  This object is typically accessed through the
`ray` object that hangs off of index objects.  The resulting arrays
have their dimensionality reduced to one, and an ordered list of
points at an (x,y) tuple along `axis` are available, as is the `t`
field, which corresponds to a unitless measurement along the ray from
start to end.

#### Region {#sec:dobj-region}

*Arguments*: 

 * Center
 * Left edge
 * Right edge

A 3D region of data with an arbitrary center.  Takes an array of three
*left_edge* coordinates, three *right_edge* coordinates, and a
*center* that can be anywhere in the domain.  If the selected region
extends past the edges of the domain, no data will be found there,
though the object's `left_edge` or `right_edge` are not modified.

#### Slice {#sec:dobj-slice}

*Arguments*: 

 * Axis
 * Coord

This is a data object corresponding to a slice through the simulation
domain.  This object is typically accessed through the `slice` object
that hangs off of index objects.  Slice is an orthogonal slice through
the data, taking all the points at the finest resolution available and
then indexing them.  It is more appropriately thought of as a slice
'operator' than an object, however, as its field and coordinate can
both change.

#### Smoothed covering grid {#sec:dobj-smoothed_covering_grid}

*Arguments*: 

 * Level
 * Left edge
 * Active Dimensions

A 3D region with all data extracted and interpolated to a single,
specified resolution.  (Identical to covering_grid, except that it
interpolates.)  Smoothed covering grids start at level 0,
interpolating to fill the region to level 1, replacing any cells
actually covered by level 1 data, and then recursively repeating this
process until it reaches the specified `level`.

#### Sphere {#sec:dobj-sphere}

*Arguments*: 

 * Center
 * Radius

A sphere of points defined by a *center* and a *radius*.

#### Streamline {#sec:dobj-streamline}

*Arguments*: 

 * Positions

This is a streamline, which is a set of points defined as being
parallel to some vector field.  This object is typically accessed
through the Streamlines.path function.  The resulting arrays have
their dimensionality reduced to one, and an ordered list of points at
an (x,y) tuple along `axis` are available, as is the `t` field, which
corresponds to a unitless measurement along the ray from start to end.

#### Surface {#sec:dobj-surface}

*Arguments*: 

 * Data source
 * Surface field
 * Field value

This surface object identifies isocontours on a cell-by-cell basis,
with no consideration of global connectedness, and returns the
vertices of the Triangles in that isocontour.  This object simply
returns the vertices of all the triangles calculated by the [marching
cubes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marching_cubes) algorithm; for
more complex operations, such as identifying connected sets of cells
above a given threshold, see the extract_connected_sets function.
This is more useful for calculating, for instance, total isocontour
area, or visualizing in an external program (such as
[MeshLab](http://www.meshlab.net).)  The object has the properties .vertices
and will sample values if a field is requested.  The values are
interpolated to the center of a given face.

#### Union {#sec:dobj-union}

*Arguments*: 

 * Data objects

This is a more efficient method of selecting the union of multiple
data selection objects.  Creating one of these objects returns the
union of all of the sub-objects; it is designed to be a faster method
than chaining | (or) operations to create a single, large union.

