## Halo-Finding and Catalogs {#sec:halo_finding}

In cosmological simulations, dark matter is nearly always represented as a collection of collisionless particles. **CITE SOMETHING ABOUT VLASOV GRID SOLUTIONS**
This is well-suited to approximating it as a collisionless fluid; however, the identification of structures within that collection of particles can take on several forms, addressing different use cases to different degrees of accuracy. **CITE HALO FINDING COMPARISON PAPER**
Being able to identify halos, as well as their associated baryonic content, is necessary for rapid analysis of cosmological simulations.
Furthermore, convergence studies and cross-simulation comparisons requires a consistent method for identifying dark matter halos, as well as the ability to track their growth over time.

In past versions of `yt`, several specific halo finders were bundled and made available to work on any class of data `yt` was able to read.
These included the HOP halo finder, the classic Friends-of-Friends (FOF) halo finder **CITE**, a scalable and Parallel HOP **CITE**, and a wrapping of the ORIGAMI **CITE** code for filament identification.
To do so, `yt` would utilize direct in-memory connectors with these implementations; whereas typically data connectors are written for each individual dataset format for individual halo finding methods, this enabled a single connector to be written from `yt` to the halo finder.
In addition to these bundled halo finders, a direct in-memory interface with Rockstar **CITE** was developed that sidestepped Rockstar's built in load-balancing to minimize data duplication and transfer.

`yt` provides a unique set of functionality for accessing halo catalogs, as it provides the ability to query their values both *as* catalogs and as the original, underlying datasets.
This means that the same selection and analysis operations that can be conducted on a "primary" dataset can also be conducted on the halo catalog; furthermore, the halo catalog can be used as input to data selection operations.
This enables, for instance, querying original dark matter particle values in a halo (as defined by any characteristic radius of that halo) simultaneously with querying baryonic cells or particles included within.

As discussed in **CITE YTREE**, this can be used as input into other tools to provide sophisticated, graph-based queries of datasets and halo merger trees over cosmological time.

`yt` also includes an internal halo finding tool that is not widely exposed, built on its implementation of a union-find data structure for identifying topologically connected sets.
This implementation, a "particle contour tree," uses this union-find data structure to connect (via percolation) particles into simple Friends-of-Friends collections.
These can then be used as input into more sophisticated phase-space finders, such as Rockstar, and as done in **CITE DARK SKY**.
